README.md, before:

[![Rust](https://github.com/Trehinos/balanced-ternary/actions/workflows/rust.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Trehinos/balanced-ternary/actions/workflows/rust.yml)

# Balanced Ternary

**Balanced Ternary** is a Rust library for manipulating
**[balanced ternary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balanced_ternary)**
numbers, a numeral system with digits `-1`, `0`, and `+1`.

This system is useful in areas like computer science and mathematics due to its symmetry and unique arithmetic
properties.

## Features

- **No Standard Library:** Suitable for `#![no_std]` environments.
- **Number Conversions:** Convert between decimal and balanced ternary representations.
- **Arithmetic Operations:** Support for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
- **[Three-value Logic Operations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-valued_logic):**
    - Support for bitwise and, or, xor, and not (in Kleene algebra (K3)).
    - **Advanced logic**: Implementation of K3, BI3, L3, RM3, paraconsistent-logic and HT imply operation,
      and some more HT, BI3, L3 and post-logic operations.
- **Custom Representation:** Parse and display numbers using `+`, `0`, and `-` symbols.
- Provides the types:
    - `Digit` (`Neg`, `Zero` or `Pos`),
    - `Ternary` (heap allocated variable-length balanced-ternary number),
    - `Tryte` (6 characters long copy-type ternary number).

### Digits operators

These operators (except inc & dec) can be applied for `Ternary` with `Ternary::each(operator)`:

| Unary operators                                    | -    | 0 | +    |
|----------------------------------------------------|------|---|------|
| possibly (L3)                                      | -    | + | +    |
| necessary (L3)                                     | -    | - | +    |
| contingently (L3)                                  | -    | + | -    |
| ht_not (HT)                                        | +    | - | -    |
| post (post logic)<br>eqv. `self.pre().pre()`       | 0    | + | -    |
| pre (inverse of post)<br>eqv. `self.post().post()` | +    | - | 0    |
| `!` (not) / `-` (neg) (L3)                         | +    | 0 | -    |
| absolute_positive                                  | +    | 0 | +    |
| positive                                           | 0    | 0 | +    |
| not_negative                                       | 0    | + | +    |
| not_positive                                       | -    | - | 0    |
| negative                                           | -    | 0 | 0    |
| absolute_negative                                  | -    | 0 | -    |
| inc                                                | 0    | + | `+-` |
| dec                                                | `-+` | - | 0    |

These operators (except add & sub) can be applied for `Ternary` with:

- `Ternary::each_with(operator, with)`, or,
- `Ternary::each_zip(operator, other)`:

| Binary operators  | -<br>- | -<br>0 | -<br>+ | 0<br>- | 0<br>0 | 0<br>+ | +<br>- | +<br>0 | +<br>+ |
|-------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| `+` (add)         | `-+`   | -      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | +      | `+-`   |
| `-` (sub)         | 0      | -      | `-+`   | +      | 0      | -      | `+-`   | +      | 0      |
| `/` (div)         | +      |        | -      | 0      |        | 0      | -      |        | +      |
| `*` (mul)         | +      | 0      | -      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| `&` (bitand) (L3) | -      | -      | -      | -      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| bi3_and (BI3)     | -      | 0      | -      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| `\|` (bitor) (L3) | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | +      | +      | +      | +      |
| bi3_or (BI3)      | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | 0      | +      | 0      | +      |
| `^` (bitxor) (L3) | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | 0      | +      | 0      | -      |
| k3_equiv (K3)     | +      | 0      | -      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| k3_imply (K3)     | +      | +      | +      | 0      | 0      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |
| bi3_imply (BI3)   | +      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| l3_imply (L3)     | +      | +      | +      | 0      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |
| rm3_imply (RM3)   | +      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      | -      | -      | +      |
| para_imply (HT)   | +      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |
| ht_imply (HT)     | +      | +      | +      | -      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |

## Examples

### Convert between decimal and balanced ternary

```rust
use balanced_ternary::*;

fn test() {
    let ternary = Ternary::from_dec(5);
    assert_eq!(ternary.to_string(), "+--");

    let ternary = Ternary::parse("+--");
    assert_eq!(ternary.to_dec(), 5);
}
```

### Perform arithmetic or logic operations

```rust
use balanced_ternary::*;

fn test() {
    let a = Ternary::from_dec(9);
    let b = Ternary::from_dec(4);
    let sum = &a + &b;
    assert_eq!(ternary.to_string(), "+++");
    assert_eq!(sum.to_dec(), 13);

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("++00") & &Ternary::parse("0000");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "0000");

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("++00") & &Ternary::parse("0+00");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "0+00");

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("+000") | &Ternary::parse("000-");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "+000");


    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("+000") & &Ternary::parse("000-");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "000-");

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("+000") | &Ternary::parse("000+");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "+00+");
}
```

### Handle negative numbers

```rust
use balanced_ternary::*;

fn test() {
    let negative = Ternary::from_dec(-5);
    assert_eq!(negative.to_string(), "-++");
}
```

## Installation

Add the following to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
balanced-ternary = "0.2.*"
```

## License

Copyright (c) 2025 Sébastien GELDREICH  
`Balanced Ternary` is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Rename "operators" to "operations" for consistency.
Updated terminology in `src/digit.rs` and `README.md` to use "operations" instead of "operators" for clarity and consistency in describing unary and binary functionality. This improves alignment with the intended semantics.

README.md, after:

[![Rust](https://github.com/Trehinos/balanced-ternary/actions/workflows/rust.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Trehinos/balanced-ternary/actions/workflows/rust.yml)

# Balanced Ternary

**Balanced Ternary** is a Rust library for manipulating
**[balanced ternary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balanced_ternary)**
numbers, a numeral system with digits `-1`, `0`, and `+1`.

This system is useful in areas like computer science and mathematics due to its symmetry and unique arithmetic
properties.

## Features

- **No Standard Library:** Suitable for `#![no_std]` environments.
- **Number Conversions:** Convert between decimal and balanced ternary representations.
- **Arithmetic Operations:** Support for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
- **[Three-value Logic Operations](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-valued_logic):**
    - Support for bitwise and, or, xor, and not (in Kleene algebra (K3)).
    - **Advanced logic**: Implementation of K3, BI3, L3, RM3, paraconsistent-logic and HT imply operation,
      and some more HT, BI3, L3 and post-logic operations.
- **Custom Representation:** Parse and display numbers using `+`, `0`, and `-` symbols.
- Provides the types:
    - `Digit` (`Neg`, `Zero` or `Pos`),
    - `Ternary` (heap allocated variable-length balanced-ternary number),
    - `Tryte` (6 characters long copy-type ternary number).

### Digits operations

These operations (except inc & dec) can be applied for `Ternary` with `Ternary::each(operations)`:

| Unary operations                                   | -    | 0 | +    |
|----------------------------------------------------|------|---|------|
| possibly (L3)                                      | -    | + | +    |
| necessary (L3)                                     | -    | - | +    |
| contingently (L3)                                  | -    | + | -    |
| ht_not (HT)                                        | +    | - | -    |
| post (post logic)<br>eqv. `self.pre().pre()`       | 0    | + | -    |
| pre (inverse of post)<br>eqv. `self.post().post()` | +    | - | 0    |
| `!` (not) / `-` (neg) (L3)                         | +    | 0 | -    |
| absolute_positive                                  | +    | 0 | +    |
| positive                                           | 0    | 0 | +    |
| not_negative                                       | 0    | + | +    |
| not_positive                                       | -    | - | 0    |
| negative                                           | -    | 0 | 0    |
| absolute_negative                                  | -    | 0 | -    |
| inc                                                | 0    | + | `+-` |
| dec                                                | `-+` | - | 0    |

These operations (except add & sub) can be applied for `Ternary` with:

- `Ternary::each_with(operations, with)`, or,
- `Ternary::each_zip(operations, other)`:

| Binary operations | -<br>- | -<br>0 | -<br>+ | 0<br>- | 0<br>0 | 0<br>+ | +<br>- | +<br>0 | +<br>+ |
|-------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| `+` (add)         | `-+`   | -      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | +      | `+-`   |
| `-` (sub)         | 0      | -      | `-+`   | +      | 0      | -      | `+-`   | +      | 0      |
| `/` (div)         | +      |        | -      | 0      |        | 0      | -      |        | +      |
| `*` (mul)         | +      | 0      | -      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| `&` (bitand) (L3) | -      | -      | -      | -      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| bi3_and (BI3)     | -      | 0      | -      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| `\|` (bitor) (L3) | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | +      | +      | +      | +      |
| bi3_or (BI3)      | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | 0      | +      | 0      | +      |
| `^` (bitxor) (L3) | -      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | 0      | +      | 0      | -      |
| k3_equiv (K3)     | +      | 0      | -      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| k3_imply (K3)     | +      | +      | +      | 0      | 0      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |
| bi3_imply (BI3)   | +      | 0      | +      | 0      | 0      | 0      | -      | 0      | +      |
| l3_imply (L3)     | +      | +      | +      | 0      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |
| rm3_imply (RM3)   | +      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      | -      | -      | +      |
| para_imply (HT)   | +      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |
| ht_imply (HT)     | +      | +      | +      | -      | +      | +      | -      | 0      | +      |

## Examples

### Convert between decimal and balanced ternary

```rust
use balanced_ternary::*;

fn test() {
    let ternary = Ternary::from_dec(5);
    assert_eq!(ternary.to_string(), "+--");

    let ternary = Ternary::parse("+--");
    assert_eq!(ternary.to_dec(), 5);
}
```

### Perform arithmetic or logic operations

```rust
use balanced_ternary::*;

fn test() {
    let a = Ternary::from_dec(9);
    let b = Ternary::from_dec(4);
    let sum = &a + &b;
    assert_eq!(ternary.to_string(), "+++");
    assert_eq!(sum.to_dec(), 13);

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("++00") & &Ternary::parse("0000");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "0000");

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("++00") & &Ternary::parse("0+00");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "0+00");

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("+000") | &Ternary::parse("000-");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "+000");


    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("+000") & &Ternary::parse("000-");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "000-");

    let bitwise = &Ternary::parse("+000") | &Ternary::parse("000+");
    assert_eq!(bitwise.to_string(), "+00+");
}
```

### Handle negative numbers

```rust
use balanced_ternary::*;

fn test() {
    let negative = Ternary::from_dec(-5);
    assert_eq!(negative.to_string(), "-++");
}
```

## Installation

Add the following to your `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
balanced-ternary = "0.2.*"
```

## License

Copyright (c) 2025 Sébastien GELDREICH  
`Balanced Ternary` is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).
